# TARGET-seq+ RNA-seq pre-processing pipeline

A pipeline for pre-processing of TARGET-seq+ transcriptome data. 
This is designed for plate-based 3' transcriptome data that was generated by TARGET-seq+ using oligo-dT cell barcodes.
To use the pipeline, data should already have been demultiplexed into FASTQ files for each plate with a unique i7-i5 index combination.
The FASTQ files should either contain reads from up to 384 cells with shared plate indexes, or be already demultiplexed into single cell files. 

## Setup

1. Clone the git repository
2. Install the conda environment using:
```
nohup conda env create -f conda/rnaseq_env.yml &
```

3. Generate the GENCODE reference with ERCC spike-ins using the `GENCODE_reference_build_script.sh` script.

This requires the ERCC seqeunces (`ERCC92.fa`) and GTF file (`ERCC92.gtf`).
The script will download the GENCODE reference assembly and GTF files and append the ERCC annotations. 
It then filters the GTF file to include only protein coding genes and long non-coding RNAs.
Finally it builds the STAR index.

Run the script using:

```
bash GENCODE_reference_build_script.sh
```

## Using the pipeline

### Input files

FASTQ files (or symlinks) need to be in a subdirectory called `fastq/` within the working directory where you are running the pipeline.

The pipeline can deal with two types of fastq files:
1. Single-ended reads without inline barcodes (already demultiplexed).
These need a file extension in the format: `R1_001.fastq.gz`.
In the `pipeline.yml`, specify: `SE_demultiplexed`

2. Paired-end reads where Read 1 is a cell barcode.
These need a file extension in the format: `_R[1-2]_001.fq.gz`.
In the `pipeline.yml`, specify: `PE_barcoded`

If FASTQ files are split by lane, the pipeline can merge them. In the `pipeline.yml`, specify: `lanes: split`


### Trimming

Cutadapt trims poly(A) tails and ISPCR adapters, as well as bases with a quality score below 15.

### Demultiplexing

For paired-end reads where Read 1 is a cell barcode, cutadapt will demultiplex the cell barcode. 
This is done using the `barcodes.fasta` file, which needs to be copied into the working directory. 
Reads will be split and named according to the barcode: "HTxxx".

### Mapping

The pipeline maps using STAR. STAR needs a GTF with gene annotations for mapping and gene assignment. If using ERCC spike-ins, these need to be appended to the genome fasta file before building the STAR index.
Currently mapping on a single read works.
For paired-end reads where Read 1 is a cell barcode, please specify `mapping: read2` in the `pipeline.yml`.

### Counting

Feature (gene) counting is done with either STARsolo or Featurecounts.
For STARsolo, mapping and counting are performed in a single step for all cells. This is the fastest option.
For featurecounts, mapping is performed first in a separate step for each cell.


### Usage

For STARsolo counting:
```
nohup python rnaseq_pipeline.py make full_starsolo &
```
For Featurecounts:
```
nohup python rnaseq_pipeline.py make full_featurecounts &
```
